
## What is bootstrapping? ##

Bootstrapping is a process of deploying system on a clean unconfigured OS.

Deployable resources can iether be provided offline locally, or still be
downloadable from Internet, or accessible within isolated network -
this can be made a configuration option. The main point is to provide
support of installation on virtual guests or bare metal hosts with clean OSes.

## Achieving total control ##

### Clean OS configuration ###

Salt cannot istall itself because it is "chicken and egg" problem.
Initial Salt installation and configuration should be done by other means.

Note that it is still possible to install Salt using another Salt
pre-installed on external media (i.e. on a USB disk). This case is
not "chicken and egg" problem, it is rather "chicken spawns chicken" solution.

One of the possible scenarios for boostrapping here is to deploy Salt minion
and use Salt states to install all software components using offline locally
available resources.

### Hardware configuration ###

Salt obviously cannot redefine parameters of hardware resources which are
in use by OS where it executes. However, there are also two cased:
physical machines and virtual machines.

When it comes to _virtual_ machine, hardware parameters, OS type, and image
can actually be programmatically defined before provisioning. This opens
a door to make Salt instruct _hypervisor_ or _host OS_ to instantiate all
other nodes required by the managed system with all parameters defined
_through_ Salt configuration.

In case of virtualization bootstrapping can be used to deploy only Salt minion
and continue [orchestrated](orchestration.md) system installation with
all resources available on the network.

## General approach for bootstrapping ##

The common idea to all bootstrapping cases is to install Salt minion first.
On Linux it can be online or offline yum repositories with necessary packages.
On Windows installer supports [unnattended installation](https://github.com/saltstack/salt-windows-msi/blob/master/README.md).

Then, generage temporary configuration file using a set of minimal parameters:
* Node type: minion or master
* Project name
* Profile name

Additional parameters are used later to apply required state in offline mode
with temporary generated configuration file using command `salt-call --local`:
* Salt function (i.e. `state.sls`)
* Arguments to Salt function

Note that all salt functions are executed executed non-stop by Salt minion
without providing any chance to suspend execution. If external resources
(i.e. network file servers) are not available during some state execution,
it will simply fail. Therefore, bootstrapping should use Salt function
which is provided with everything it need to complete on target minion.
Otherwise, [orchestrated](orchestration.md) has to be used.

## Use Cases ##

### `initial_master` - configure master for specific project/profile ###

**Case:**
* Run bootstrap script to configure new Salt master for specific
  project/profile.
* Cloud deployment where master itself is virtualized and
  should be prepared automatically.

**Input:**
* Salt master and minion software packages.
* Salt master and minion configuration files.
* At least project id and profile id, possibly Satl minion id (but this
  can be derived from pillar).
* Salt states sources to complete setup through Salt itself using
  profile configuration data.
* All additional artifacts used for Salt master and minion for
  specified project/profile.

**Simplifications:** none.

**Complications:**
* Collecting all resources and build such package should be done
  automatically (i.e. in Jenkins job).
* Moreover, to keep packages consistent, the build process must comply
  wiht one definition rule and rely on pillar data for specific
  project/profile. There is a problem to access pillar data for other
  project/profiles if it was not published through pillar top file.

**Solution:**
* Use Salt API in Python script to run build process based on
  configuration data in the pillar.
* In order to access pillar from specific project/profile,
  Salt master configuration file on the system which performs
  such builds should provide list of other projects/profiles.
  The top files will use this list to include these pillar files
  under specific keys (pillars can be included under specific keys
  to avoid merging them at the top level).

### `minion_to_master` - bootstrap minion to connect to master ###

**Case:**
* Run bootstrap script to connect new minion to the system.
* Activate newly spawned VM or PXE-booted host.

**Input:**
* Salt minion software packages.
* Salt minion configuration file.
* Salt minion id matched to one of those in system profile.
* Possibly Salt master's IP to avoid reliance on DNS.

**Simplifications:**
* It can be assumed that master is already configured and running.
  Therefore, everything can be pre-generated by the running master
  and provided to this minion as data (simplified logic for the script).
* All resources can be pushed to such minion from existing master.
  There is no need to built a package to be used offline.

**Complications:** none.

### `standalone_minion` - bootstrap as installer ###

**Case:**
* This bootstrap is a "pre-built" installer which is run on individual
  hosts in Salt master-less environment to configure machine based on
  pillar profile configuration.
* Install all required software for specific host as `highstate` specifies.

**Input:**
* All input is similar to `initial_master` case.
  The only difference is that all information which goes to Salt master
  configuration file should be defined completely in Salt minion
  configuration file.

**Simplifications:**
* It can be created as a special mode for `initial_master` case.

**Complications:**
* The inter-dependencies between required states should be well defined
  to let `highstate` complete successfully. However, these inter-dependencies
  were deliberately removed (reduced) for orchestration to "pull" less
  dependent states on each orchestration step which are run reduntantly.

## Scripts ##

TODO

# [footer] #


